---
title: "Development of Thin Layer Ultra-Heavy Oil Reservoirs with Horizontal Well Steamflooding and Treatment Technology for Steam Breakthrough"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/14-2014-12-08-spe
excerpt: ''
date: 2014-12-08
venue: 'SPE International Heavy Oil Conference and Exhibition'
paperurl: 'https://onepetro.org/SPEHOCE/proceedings-abstract/14HOCE/3-14HOCE/D031S010R003/450643'
citation: 'Feng, Qihong, Zhen Li, Sen Wang, Xiaodong Han, Pingyuan Ge, Tian Xia, and Changhong Sun. "Development of Thin Layer Ultra-Heavy Oil Reservoirs with Horizontal Well Steamflooding and Treatment Technology for Steam Breakthrough." In SPE International Heavy Oil Conference and Exhibition. OnePetro, 2014.'
---
Steamflooding is an effective and commonly-used thermal recovery technique for the development of heavy oil reservoirs. In the Pai-601 block of Chunfeng Oilfield where the viscosity is over 50000 mPa.s with the layer thickness only ranging from 4 to 10 m, traditional thermal recovery technology using vertical well cannot produce preferable performance for the thin net pay; thus a horizontal well steamflooding pilot is implemented. However, steam breakthrough takes place frequently in this field, leading to ineffective steam circulation and seriously weakening the development. Therefore, numerical simulation and field production dynamic analysis are applied to understand the characteristics of steam breakthrough, and to provide an efficient avenue for the treatment. The validity of the numerical simulation results is verified by the field tests.

On the basis of the reservoir geologic features as well as the well trajectory information, the reasons for steam breakthrough are analyzed, which manifest the human factors such as the well spacing and target point play important roles in the steam breakthrough except the geological factors, and careful attentions should be paid for the well design. Then, the breakthrough channels under various situations are characterized by numerical simulation technique, and the effects of different geologic and development factors on the steam breakthrough are also analyzed, like steam injection rate, reservoir heterogeneity, and etc. The result shows that the locations of steam breakthrough in Pai-601 can be mainly classified into three kinds: the lateral unimodal type, the middle unimodal type and the bimodal type, and the conditions for each kind are also presented. To further improve the development performance, the nitrogen foam is injected to impede the steam breakthrough. Simulation study shows that it’s significantly efficient for the improvement of oil production rate. This technology will provide guidance for the treatment of steam breakthrough in heavy oil reservoirs.



[Download paper here](https://onepetro.org/SPEHOCE/proceedings-abstract/14HOCE/3-14HOCE/D031S010R003/450643)

Recommended citation: Feng, Qihong, Zhen Li, Sen Wang, Xiaodong Han, Pingyuan Ge, Tian Xia, and Changhong Sun. "Development of Thin Layer Ultra-Heavy Oil Reservoirs with Horizontal Well Steamflooding and Treatment Technology for Steam Breakthrough." In SPE International Heavy Oil Conference and Exhibition. OnePetro, 2014.